The house mouse is a small mammal of the order Rodentia, characteristically having a pointed snout, large rounded ears, and a long and almost hairless tail.
Although a wild animal, the house mouse has benefited significantly from associating with human habitation to the point that truly wild populations are significantly less common than the semi-tame populations near human activity.
The house mouse has been domesticated as the pet.
The average sleep time of a captive house mouse is reported to be 12.5 hours per day.
Many studies have been done on mouse phylogenies to reconstruct early human movements.
Domestic varieties of the house mouse are bred as a food source for some carnivorous pet reptiles, birds, arthropods, and fish.
Although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides a list with diseases transmitted by rodents, only a few of the diseases are transmitted through the house mouse.
While rat fleas are the most common vectors, cat fleas and mouse fleas are less common modes of transmission.
New Zealand had no land mammals other than two species of bat prior to human occupation, and the house mouse is one of many species that have been introduced.
Some populations are hybrids of different subspecies, including the Japanese house mouse.
The average sleep time of a captive house mouse is reported to be 12.5 hours per day.
The social behavior of the house mouse is not rigidly fixed into species-specific patterns but is instead adaptable to the environmental conditions, such as the availability of food and space.
The social unit of commensal house mouse populations generally consists of one male and two or more females, usually related.
In open areas such as shrubs and fields, the house mouse population is known as noncommensal.
Female-female aggression in the noncommensal house mouse populations is much higher, reaching a level generally attributed to free-ranging species. 
Both commensal and noncommensal house mouse males aggressively defend their territory and act to exclude all intruders.
However, the ventral area of the mouse retina has a much greater density of ultraviolet-sensitive cones than other areas of the retina, although the biological significance of this structure is unknown.
One female can have 5 to 10 litters per year, so the mouse population can increase very quickly. Breeding occurs throughout the year.
Both evolutionary and behavioral consequences result from the polygamous nature of the house mouse.
When multiple males mate with one female, there are multiple sets of sperm gametes in a female mouse.
In the house mouse, the major urinary protein gene cluster provides a highly polymorphic scent signal of genetic identity that appears to underlie kin recognition and inbreeding avoidance.
A region of mouse chromosome 16 is associated with thyroid function in mice.
The Methuselah Mouse Prize is a competition to breed or engineer extremely long-lived laboratory mice.
As of 2005, the record holder was a genetically engineered mouse that lived for 1,819 days.
The house mouse first arrived in the Americas in the early sixteenth century. It was carried aboard on the ships of Spanish explorers and Conquistadors.